# eMCDP

A tool built on top of mc-overlaps [1] (mcdp2 [2] predecessor), allowing for colocalization analysis on genomic windows. Written in C++.

## How to use this?

#### Basic data set

```bash
make run_sample # to run the basic algorithm on basic data set
```

#### Running a large (|R|=2500, |Q|=5000) dataset, p-value for whole genome

```bash
make clean && make run_simple_pvalue REF_PATH=data/02-synth-data/g24_8.ref.tsv QUERY_PATH=data/02-synth-data/g24_8.query.tsv CHR_SIZES_PATH=data/02-synth-data/g24_sizes.tsv OUTPUT_PATH=data/output/02-synth-data-g24_8.txt
```

#### Windows

Window set can be specified in 2 ways:

- from a file with `--windows.source file --windows.path <path-to-your-windows-file>`. The format of windows file is the same as the format for intervals file.
- or generated by the program:
  - either generate consecutive windows with `--windows.source basic --windows.size <your-window-size>` or overlapping with `--windows.source dense --windows.size <your-windows-size> --windows.step <your-step-size>`, which generates a set of overlapping windows of given size shifted by your-step-size

#### Ooutput

If not specified, the logs and output will be directed to stdout. To specify the output file for logs use the `--logs <name-of-your-logs-file>` and to specify the output file for results use the `--o <name-of-your-output-file>` flag. Logs and results will be placed into the `data/logs` and `data/output` directories respecitvely.

### TODO

- make `CMakeLists.txt` file so everyone can use it easily
- write a proper documentation on how to use it will all flags
- add --h/--help flag and print help info for all flags
- finish writing the function to calculate 4 sets of probabilities to be merged
- implement a flow to run fast algorithm for overlapping sets of windows:
  - specify --algorithm naive/fast
  - split overlapping windows into sections
  - calculate all sections (4 sets of probs, starting/ending in 0/1)
  - write a function to merge 4 sets of probs for 2 sections
  - for each window merge necessary sections

> [1] Askar Gafurov, Broňa Brejová, Paul Medvedev,
> Markov chains improve the significance computation of overlapping genome annotations,
> Bioinformatics, Volume 38, Issue Supplement_1, July 2022, Pages i203–i211, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac255

> [2] Gafurov, A., Vinař, T., Medvedev, P., Brejová, B. (2024). Efficient Analysis of Annotation Colocalization Accounting for Genomic Contexts. In: Ma, J. (eds) Research in Computational Molecular Biology. RECOMB 2024. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 14758. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-3989-4_3
